---
layout: page
title: Data and The Beatles
permalink: /data-and-the-beatles/
---

When I was 15 years old, I stumbled upon the catalogue of a mildly famous british invasion band of the 1960s. I am of course talking about The Beatles. John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison, and Ringo Starr took the world in a swift, yet decisive swoop. And in the summer of 2006, they took me as well.
My journey in life and in music has since moved on by many steps, and yet my love for the music of The Beatles never cedes. There is something to their music that just - sticks. And as I enjoy combining my hobbies, I was looking into what fun project I could dive into that would combine my passion for data science with my love for music. In this case, my love for The Beatles.

For some reason, I found myself reminded the other day of the odd <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_is_dead">conspiracy theory</a> that, allegedly, Paul McCartney died in a car crash in November 1966 before the recordings for Sgt. Pepper's and was then replaced by a double. People believed they'd see signs for that everywhere, like the Abbey Road album cover where Macca is seen barefoot (or so people thought) and a car has a cryptic license plate.
Sir Paul McCartney is, of course, alive and well, and I sincerely wish him the best for many more years to come. If you haven't listened, his latest work is even fairly good, I heartily recommend it. But given my scientific and inquisitive mindset, I wondered: was there a way to tackle this question empirically, from the data-driven perspective? How could we deal with this?

I quickly went on to formulate a hypothesis. Suppose we were able to capture, in some ways, some characteristics of Beatles-songs. Knowing which songs McCartney (mainly) composed (despite the Lennon&McCartney-credit, it is usually possible to tell), we can see if we can identify a songwriting-pattern that is unique to Paul McCartney. We could then compare his songwriting before and after his alleged death and see if we could spot a difference.
Before I even knew it, I was already knee-deep in coding (and debugging...). I used the wonderful <a href="https://github.com/charlie86/spotifyr">SpotifyR</a> library for R and accessed song-data for The Beatles that I then somewhat cleaned and loaded into Python. The whole analysis is of course also doable in R, but I favored Python for this project. There are also API-Wrapper for Spotify for Python, such as the <a href="https://spotipy.readthedocs.io/en/2.22.1/">spotipy</a> package, but I found it somewhat worse to handle than SpotifyR. Either way, I uploaded the <a href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maggomor/Has-Paul-McCartney-died/main/beatles.csv">dataset on Beatles songs</a> on my <a href="https://github.com/maggomor/Has-Paul-McCartney-died">Github Repository for this project</a>, where you will also find a <a href="https://github.com/maggomor/Has-Paul-McCartney-died/blob/main/McCartney_Analyse.ipynb">Jupyter Notebook I did with Google Colab</a> with which you can code along and follow my steps. Here, I mainly wish to outline the basics of my findings.
